---
title: (Gender) Binary in the Machine
description: 'What is the role of the gender binary in machine
learning processes?'
pubDate: 'January 30, 2025'
heroImage: '/codes/binary_final.png'
---
I often get this question about binaries when I'm talking about
resisting gender binaries within a technological context: but aren't
machines built on binary structures? Isn't the technology, at its
core, a bunch of zeroes and ones anyway?

The question is convincing. It suggests that if machine systems are
founded on a binary, an either/or schema, and are made possible
through that schema, then there must be something foundational and
perhaps even objectively true about that schema. Of course the person
who is asking the question never quite phrases it in this way, but I
imagine that they are thinking it. (Or at least I am thinking it,
which is enough of a provocation anyway.)

My answer to the question is not necessarily. Just because we are
based in one paradigm doesn't mean we have to stick to that paradigm,
especially if we are conscious of its structures and how they
function.

This is a core idea in Queer Studies. The role of the binary as a
constituting the structure of gender relations but not fully
determining those structures in advance can be traced back to the
godparent of Queer Studies, Judith Butler. In their 1993 book,
[*Bodies That Matter: On The Discursive Limits of
Sex*](https://www.routledge.com/Bodies-That-Matter-On-the-Discursive-Limits-of-Sex/Butler/p/book/9780415610155?srsltid=AfmBOoqqbi5XxcCaXWd2Gz5LfM8gjDVAyXlGdUaa1T0ifBClrUHs6ASI),
a follow-up to their famous debut, [*Gender Trouble: Feminism and the
Subversion of
Identity*](https://www.routledge.com/Gender-Trouble-Feminism-and-the-Subversion-of-Identity/Butler/p/book/9780415389556?srsltid=AfmBOorBazBfB5F7U8bMqBJfhB71K0-iA7pNCdJninKbXOPi2-5dRXEL),
they explains at great length, in various examples ranging from
Plato's dialogues in ancient Greece to a 1990 documentary on drag
balls in New York City, *Paris is Burning*, that gender creates
conditions which it never fully carries out.[^1]

> The practice by which gendering occurs, the embodying of norms, is a
compulsory practice, a forcible production, but not for that reason
fully determining. To the extent that gender is an assignment, it is
an assignment which is never quite carried out according to
expectation, whose addressee never quite inhabits the ideal s/he is
compelled to approximate.
>
> *Judith Butler,* Bodies That Matter, *p.180*

Butler uses this failure of gender to manifest its ideals as a space
to read how gender re-works its norms and habits into something like
resistance. For example, in the case of drag ball culture, the kinship
structures of the traditional, nuclear, heterosexual family are
re-worked into the performers' communitarian living arrangements
called "houses," which nurture and support the performers who have
been rejected from traditional family structures. (For Butler,
interestingly, the radical gender subversion doesn't come from the
drag performances themselves, which reinscribe traditional gender
roles of femininity, and are therefore necessarily in tension with
their own subversiveness, but from these kinship structures that
reimagine what the family structure could be.)

The point is that, for Butler, the structures we start with are never
fully determining. In the enactment, in the performativity of gender
roles, there is room for disrupting expectation, of acting otherwise.
And this point is my takeoff for the critique of gender binaries in
machine learning systems. Just because we emerge from a binary system
doesn't mean we need to be fully determined by it. From here, it is
possible to imagine systems that include nonbinary components.

Certainly, however, if we are not paying attention, our assumptions
will flow from the starting point, and the paradigm that engenders
binary thinking. This is exactly the point I'm trying to make in my
most recent paper, which explores what I call "myths" associated the
gender binary and the way it's being operationalized to study bias and
discrimination in NLP. Here, I'm exploring how NLP methods take the
either/or and categorical aspects of the binary and directly impose
those into their bias mitigation and evaluation. In that paper, I
incorporate Queer Studies theorizing (by figures like Butler, Eve
Kosofsky Sedgwick, and Jack Halberstam) on the binary to try and
unmoor it from such rigid thinking.

*"Binary code" by Christiaan Colen is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0;
overlay image,
[combotrans.svg](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/), by
user:pschemp, CC BY-SA 3.0, via Wikimedia Commons.*

[^1]: Zeyl, D. J. (trans.), 2000, Plato: Timaeus, Indianapolis and
Cambridge, Mass: Hackett Publishing Co.; Livingston, Jennie, et al.,
editors. Paris Is Burning. The Criterion Collection, 2021.

